#summary How to shuffle sequence alignments

= Introduction =

The following algorithm for shuffling sequence alignments preserves

  * The exact number of each residue type
  * The exact co-distribution of residues within columns
  * The exact total number of gaps
  * The exact total number of left-end gaps
  * The exact average gap length
  * The exact total number of gap characters
  * The approximate distribution of hydrophobic residues
  * The approximate distribution of conserved columns

The algorithm does not necessarily preserve:

  * The exact sequence of residues in each sequence.
  * The exact distribution of gap lengths.
  * The proportion of the total gap length residing in end-gaps
  * The number of right end gaps

  # If sequence weighting is used, first sort the sequences in the alignment in order of sequence weight.  This will help reduce the impact of some residues moving to nearby sequences during shuffling.
  # For each column, store the following information in a data structure
    # The gap pattern of the column
    # An ordered list of the non-gap characters in the column
    # The gap pattern of the subsequent column in the original alignment (the first column is considered subsequent to the final column for this analysis)
    # The consensus residue type of the column as one of the following categories ("hydrophobicity") (For nucleotide sequences, use an actual nucleotide for the consensus):
      # FWY (aromatic)
      # CILMV (hydrophobic)
      # AGPST (small)
      # DENQKRH (polar)
    # The degree of sequence conservation in the column in one of three categories ("conservation"):
      # Less conserved than average
      # About average
      # More conserved than average
  # Train two Markov chains: one for hydrophobicity, and one for conservation, from the sequence of columns in the original alignment.
  # Assort the columns into groups with the same number of gap characters in each column.
  # Begin the shuffled alignment by removing one randomly chosen column from the group possessing the same number of gap characters as the first column of the original alignment.  Use this column as the first column of the shuffled alignment.
  # Choose each subsequent column as follows:
    # Choose a column at random, subject to the following conditions:
      * with the same number of gaps as the column that followed the previous column in the original alignment.
      * with the probability of choosing each column based on the joint probability of conservation and hydrophobicity from the previous column.  As columns are removed, this probability will need to be biased by the distribution of properties remaining in the bin, as the distribution begins to vary from the original distribution.
    # Distribute the gap and non-gap characters of the new column to match the (permuted version of the) gap pattern stored in the subsequent-column-pattern attribute of the previous column.

A more conservative approach would be to keep the original alignment gapping structure completely intact.  But there is likely to be true useful significant similarity in the original gapping pattern.